Welcome to this section of the course on modifying the MLP activations.
In some sense, this section is not any different from the previous few sections, in that we are going
to write hook functions to modify the MLP activations, sometimes just in one layer.
Sometimes we will loop over all the layers and we will measure the impact of those modifications on
embeddings, vectors and on model output logits.
But on the other hand, we do have some unique challenges when working with MLP layers.
In particular, the expansion layers.
And these are challenges that we didn't really have to worry about in the previous sections, at least
not as much.
For example, when we are zeroing out attention heads, there's only one or a few dozen attention heads,
depending on the model size, so we can actually just go through and cut out each one in turn and see
what happens.
But that kind of strategy just doesn't really work for the MLP layer, especially not the expansion
layer.
There are thousands of neurons in that layer, and so each one is going to have a relatively small impact.
And it also just becomes completely computationally infeasible to loop through every single one of those
neurons.
So basically the goals and the unique features of this section are to think of some ways that we can
deal with that huge dimensionality expansion.
The different approaches that I will introduce you to in this section are all focused on using some
kind of statistical criterion, perhaps a descriptive statistic, or an inferential statistical test
to determine how we can slice up the MLP Space so that we are doing causal experiments without just
completely losing our minds over the sheer number of neurons in those layers.
Okay.
And with that, as an introduction to this section, let me now tell you about this video.
This is a code demo where I will show you how to replace percentages of neurons with the median value.
So for example, we can find the top 10% of the MLP neurons in some layer that are most active, maybe
for one token or maybe for all of the tokens in the sequence.
And then we just replace those activations from those neurons with the median value from the population.
And that means that all of the other neurons have their activation values preserved so unaffected in
the little experiment that I will set up here.
I will successively increase the rate of replacement from 10% to 90%, and you'll see a pretty remarkable
observation that there isn't much difference between 10% and 90% of the replacements on the final model
logits.
And of course, we will discuss how to interpret that finding.
Okay.
So here's how it's going to go down in the demo.
We're going to work with GPT two large.
This is a nice model to work with here because it has over 5000 neurons in the expansion layer of MLP.
So there is definitely no way that we are going to have a for loop over all 5000 of those individual
neurons to explore the impact of manipulating that layer.
I'm going to use this famous, really cliche text.
It was a dark and stormy night.
You can see the word night is missing here from the text.
And then we are going to manipulate and then look at the output logits for the word stormy to see whether
GPT predicts the word night.
Okay.
And I also have this other text here as a suggestion for you to continue exploring and see whether the
findings that we observe, whether those are unique to this cheesy prose, or whether it seems to be
a more general phenomenon that replicates in other text sequences.
Now, when I run the forward pass on this text, I'm going to implant a hook function that simply extracts
all of the MLP activations from one layer.
And then we can make a histogram of those activations.
This is from layer nine.
Now the point here is just to explore the algorithm for replacing data with the median value.
I'm not actually going to manipulate the data just yet.
And yet, as you've seen earlier in the course, this distribution is shifted towards negative and kind
of looks like there's two distributions superimposed.
One is this Gaussian here and the other is maybe also Gaussian or maybe like a uniform distribution.
Anyway, I'm not really going to investigate that possibility of multiple distributions here.
But what I am going to do in this video is take 10% of the top most active neurons here, and replace
their activation value with the median of the entire distribution.
And that's what you see here.
So the black squares show the histogram of the MLP activations from one token before replacing with
the median.
And then the blue distribution shows the histogram after I replaced the top 10% of the values with the
median.
So there's this sharp peak here, and that is the median of the original distribution.
And then you can see this like deflation of the distribution over here.
That corresponds to where the top 10% of the values were sitting.
And now of course there's no more data here because all of these neurons had their activation values
replaced with the median value up here.
Okay.
I still haven't done any manipulations yet.
This is just exploration and demonstration of what this method is doing and how it works.
Next, I want to see whether the clean model really does think that the token after the sequence ends
should be the word night.
And that is indeed what we see here.
These are the final output logits from the clean model.
And the largest token is for the word night.
And you can also see that the log softmax value is very close to zero, which means the softmax probability
will be very close to one.
Okay, so now we are ready for the experiment.
Here you see the code that runs the experiment.
So I have this for loop here over all of the layers.
And then within each layer I define this hook function that I will implant and then immediately remove.
And inside this hook I grab all of the activations from the MLP expansion layer.
You can see I'm implanting this hook into CFC.
So the fully connected layer just from the final token.
So here I'm only modifying the final token that would correspond to the word stormy.
It could also be interesting to try manipulating the other tokens.
Maybe the token for the word dark, but I'm going to stick with just the final token for this code demo.
So then I calculate the median of all of those values.
Find the top p percent.
So that's this index variable here.
Ripple rates.
You can see that's this for loop indexing variable here.
So this variable ripple rate or replacement rate varies between 1 and 9 inclusive.
And then this little expression down here basically says that I am dividing the ripple rate by ten and
multiplying it by the number of MLP neurons.
And that gives me the percentage of the neurons corresponding to a given value of ripple rate.
So all this means is that at different iterations of this inner for loop here I will find the indices
for the top 10%, 20%, 30%, and so on up to 90% of the neurons, and then I replace them with the
median value from the whole population of neurons, again only for the final token.
And then I return that manipulated output so that it continues to be processed in the rest of the forward
pass in the model.
So here I do the actual forward pass.
And then yeah, here I've removed the hook so that we can use a fresh instance of the hook in the next
iteration in this for loop.
And then down here I calculate the log softmax of the output logits for the final token.
And then I grab the one index that corresponds to the target index.
This was the word night okay.
So that is the experiment code.
Now these results are two dimensional because I've manipulated every layer.
And within every layer I have nine different values corresponding to varying amounts of replacement.
So here you see the results.
The x axis is the transformer block.
Remember there are 36 transformers in GPT two large.
And the y axis here is the final output logit difference from the clean version of the model, where
there was no manipulations versus the manipulated version of the model that you get from this for loop
here.
So a value of zero would mean absolutely no effect whatsoever.
Negative values would mean that when I replaced the MLP neurons with their median value, then the final
model prediction for the word night actually increased.
So the model was more likely to say the word night and positive values here means that disrupting the
MLP layer had a negative impact on the model's prediction for the word night.
In other words, the words, the word the logit for the word night is higher in the clean version than
in the manipulated version.
Okay, now that is certainly an expected pattern of results.
And then, yeah, I did nine different manipulations replacing between 10 and 90% of the neurons.
And so therefore there are nine different circles within each layer.
Okay.
So there are several interesting observations here in this graph.
And I'll have more to say about this when I produce the graph in code.
But one of the striking findings that I want to draw your attention to before looking at the code is
that there's very little variability with the different manipulations within each layer.
In other words, each layer has some impact on the final logits.
So some layers have a stronger manipulation impact, some less, some even going in the opposite direction.
But within a layer, it doesn't seem to matter that much if I replace 10% or 90% of the neurons in that
layer.
That's quite surprising.
I would like you to think about what that might mean and how you would interpret that finding as I work
through the code file.
Of course, I will have a discussion about this towards the end of the video, but I want you to come
up with your own interpretation before you hear mine.
Anyway, very nice.
Let's now switch to code some libraries to import.
Here I'm importing GPT two large and I'm putting it on the GPU.
Okay, so let's see.
Here are some convenience variables the number of layers and the number of neurons.
This is like pretty arbitrary that I'm just picking uh transformer block uh three.
Index three.
Of course they're all exactly the same.
Okay.
So here I'm creating a hook that I will implant into the model.
It goes into the fully connected layer of layer nine.
And this is just arbitrary by the way.
You can play around with this if you want later.
And all I'm doing in this hook is grabbing the output from the first piece of text in this sequence,
or the first sequence in this batch, and then detaching it and bringing it back from the GPU to the
CPU.
This is just for convenience here, because we're only working with one sentence here with one text
sequence.
So therefore yeah, this just makes the indexing a little bit easier later on.
Okay.
So I'll run this code.
It was a dark and stormy night.
Okay.
Kind of cheesy but that's the famous thing.
So now I'm running the tokens through the model and getting all the output data.
Here I am.
Actually, I'm not even using the hidden states here, so if we can leave that in or out, doesn't matter.
Here I'm calculating the log softmax for the final token.
And again the idea is that I'm going to analyze these log softmax values to see what the model thinks
the next token should be.
And hopefully it thinks that the next token should be night.
Okay.
Seven tokens in total.
And there's 5120 neurons in the expansion part of the MLP layer okay.
And then here is that distribution.
And I said in the slides that I wasn't going to investigate this quirky thing that much.
But you see there's like two peaks here.
And so while I was discussing that, I had a suspicion that this is due to the first token in this sequence.
As you know, the first token always behaves weird.
So let's recreate this histogram excluding the first token.
And we get an error message.
Of course the indexing isn't with flatten, it's with MLP.
And then, lo and behold, you see that this second piece disappears.
So this weird thing over here is actually just due to the very first token.
Okay.
So let's explore median based replacement.
So here what I'm doing is just grabbing the final token.
All of the neurons.
So all the activations just from the final token calling this variable T for token or temp or something
I don't know.
Uh, finding the median of those values.
And then here I'm getting 0.1 times the number of neurons.
So this is 10% of the neurons.
And then I'm just converting it to an integer just to make sure that this is really a whole number and
not a floating point number.
Uh, torch top-k from these neurons.
And then I get these indices and then I just replace them.
So that means that the 10% of the most active neurons will have their activation values replaced with
the median of the whole distribution.
And then I'm just making histograms on that shows exactly what you saw in the slides with the little
x axis shift here.
So the values the x axis values are actually exactly the same for these two distributions I just add
and subtract a tiny tiny x axis offset just to make it a little bit more visible.
Okay.
So again the idea is that I am taking the large activation values and manipulating them to replace them
with the median of the distribution.
Okay.
So this code here just generates the output logits that I also showed.
This probably should go earlier in the code but it doesn't matter okay.
So this is for the token corresponding to the target which is night.
You can see it's really high up there.
It has a log softmax value close to zero which means when we exponentiate this, then uh, e to the
zero is one.
So the probability of the model picking this token is almost 100%.
It's going to be extremely close to 100% okay.
And that is indeed what the model thinks the next token should be.
Okay.
So now we are ready for the experiment.
A little bit of hard coding in here.
I suppose this could be better uh soft coded.
But anyway, this is how I coded it up.
Loop over all the layers, and then I'm looping over the, uh, ripple rate.
So the replacement rate and the idea is that I am going to take this integer, divide it by ten, and
then use that same multiplication and division that I showed earlier.
So this code is what you saw above.
And I'm just putting it into this hook function which I then implant into MLP.
Fully connected this particular layer Run a forward pass.
Delete that hook function from the model and then softmax the output logits again, only working with
the final token here as well.
I'm only working with the final token.
And then all the way out here I get the log softmax value for the target index for the word night.
Okay.
So we can run through that.
This is pretty fast to run in GPT or on the GPU.
Okay.
So well I guess it still takes several seconds.
And here's the code where I'm generating the figure.
So I loop over all of the different layers.
And for each layer I just make a plot of all of those log softmax values here for this layer, all nine
of the manipulations.
And then I'm subtracting that from the clean version of the logit for the same target.
And this is basically our baseline comparison value so that we can interpret the data more meaningfully.
Okay, now it looks like on layer zero you only see one dot.
So something interesting is happening there.
The full plot actually looks like this.
So this manipulation has a gigantic effect when it is implanted into the very, very, very first layer,
the very first transformer block.
It's really catastrophic.
So here there's something happening.
And right in the very beginning, when the transformer sequence first takes the embeddings from the
embeddings layer, and there's just something really important and the model just gets really confused
here.
So would be interesting to look into this in a little more detail and see, for example, what is the
actual token that the model wants to get for this run here.
But just for uh, yeah.
Just in the interest of focusing the analyses on the broader patterns, I'm going to fix the y axis
limit, so that we're actually just ignoring a lot of those data up there.
Okay.
So a couple of things you notice.
One is that, uh, across all of the layers, more often than not the values are positive, which means
that, uh, replacing the MLP neuron activation values with the median has a negative impact.
So it's lowering the log, uh, softmax value for the token that we are looking for the word night,
but not every time.
It also happens that there are layers where interfering with the MLP actually boosts the, uh, target
token logit.
Now, this sort of effect, I would be reluctant to overinterpret it.
I would want to see that reproduced in more, uh, text.
So, for example, is there something special about, uh, layer 32 that it's always producing a negative
value, or do you see that across different texts.
Sometimes it's negative and sometimes it's positive and so on.
But I find it really striking that there's very little difference between knocking out 10% and knocking
out 90% of the transformer blocks.
There's very little variability across these different manipulations within a given layer.
And so to investigate that a little bit more I'm going to do is add another zero here.
So that means that now instead of varying how much how many neurons we uh, we replace with the median
value between 10% and 90% of the population.
Instead, I'm going to replace between 1% and 9%.
So now when I rerun this experiment, every single manipulation is smaller than the smallest manipulation
that we see here.
So only manipulating between 1% and 9%.
And now we actually do start to see more variability.
And you could, you know, keep running this.
You could make this be like 500%.
Let's just try that.
Sorry not 500%.
Dividing by five hundredths.
So now it's varying between 0.2%.
And whatever nine divided by 500 is 4.5% I guess.
And now again we are seeing more variability.
And what does this tell us?
This tells us that the more we focus in on a very, very, very small number of neurons, the more we
find that we can get more variability in these results.
And what does that mean?
That means that that most of the information that is projected by the MLP layer going forwards to adjust
the embeddings vector is carried by a really tiny number, just a handful of neurons, maybe somewhere
around 1% or 2 or 3% of the neurons are really carrying most of the information.
All the rest of the neurons are just not doing a whole lot.
They're not making a really major contribution that we can actually measure at the final end of the
model.
Of course, that conclusion is just based on this one sample text that I used.
So you could certainly try reproducing this pattern of results with more text.
But in general, this is a fairly typical finding that for a given, uh, token of relatively small
number of MLP neurons carry a lot of information, the dimensionality explosion problem is present basically
everywhere in mechanistic interpretability of large language models.
But it's really the worst in the MLP expansion layer because there's just so many neurons in there.
So you really need some way to select neurons for manipulation.
What I showed you in this video is a descriptive, characteristic based approach, and in the next video
for contrast, I will show you an inferential statistical approach.
Also quite striking that we get basically the same effect for 10% versus 90% of neuron ablations.
And we really have to get down to the single digit percents before we start seeing some variability.
So that is consistent with the idea that a very small number of MLP neurons are carrying most of the
information for a given token.
Of course, you have to keep in mind that these neurons are not processing the actual embeddings vectors
themselves.
They are processing the adjustments to the embeddings vectors that will be added back onto the embeddings
after this layer gets contracted, and then summed back onto the residual stream.